### Welcome
Hello from the other side! You are now developing a model collaboration method for our library. This document will guide you through the process of creating, testing, and submitting your method.

#### Where to put your code
You will move to your own branch, create a new script `<type>_<method_name>.py` in the `method/` directory, and implement your method there. `<type>` should be in `api, text, logit, weight`, or very occassionally `mixed` (consult with Shangbin if your approach is mixed), `<method_name>` should be a one-or-two-word phrase.

After implementing and testing your method, before the pull request, add a description of your method to `method/user_readme.md` and follow the format there.

**You may only submit one method per pull request. You may only modify the `.py` of your approach and the `user_readme.md`.** If you have suggestions for other methods / shared helper functions, please consult with Shangbin.

#### A template
A template of an approach is available in the `method/sample_approach.md` file. You can use this as a starting point for your own method.

#### Helper functions
We provide a lot of helper functions for you to build on: distributed generation with multiple models and multiple GPUs, distributed sft, PSO for optimizing a bunch of weights/hyperparameters, etc.

`method/distributed_generation.py`

Import: `from method import distributed_generation`
Usage: `distributed_generation(list_of_model_name, list_of_input_list, list_of_gpu_id, max_response_length=None)`
- `list_of_model_name`: a list of model names (strings) that are compatible with `transformers.AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained()`. Should be `model_names` that users provide in config files.
- `list_of_input_list`: a list of list of strings, size len(model_names) * any. Each inner list contains the inputs to be generated by the corresponding model.
- `list_of_gpu_id`: a list of GPU ids (integers) to use for generation. The length of this list could be anything: smaller, equal, larger than len(model_names). Larger is a waste. Smaller means models are assigned to GPUs in a round-robin fashion. Equal is perhaps best for parallelism. Users provide `gpu_ids` in config files, you should pass in it or a subset of it.
- `max_response_length`: HIGHLY optional, you probably don't need to set this. If set, it overrides the default max response length provided in the config. Only when it makes sense to generate another amount of tokens, shorter/longer than the response length the user asked for, to set this. Should be rare.
- It can work with one model! Just do [model_name], [input_list], [gpu_id] in that case.

`data/eval.py`

Import: `from data import eval`

Taking the evaluation inputs as a list: `input_list = eval.prepare_inputs(task, task_type, split, ratio=1.0)`
- `task`: string, the name of the evaluation task, e.g., `agieval`
- `task_type`: string, the type of the evaluation task, e.g., `multiple_choice`. See `data/eval_readme.md` for valid (task, task_type) combinations.
- `split`: string, the data split to use, `dev` or `test`.
- `ratio`: You almost certainly don't need to use this. Float between 0 and 1.0, the fraction of data to use. Default 1.0, use all data.
- Returns: `input_list`, a list of strings.

Evaluating a list of outputs to those inputs: `scores = eval.get_scores(task, task_type, split, outputs, ratio=1.0)`
- `task`, `task_type`, `split`, `ratio`: same as above.
- `outputs`: a list of strings, the model-generated outputs corresponding to the inputs obtained from `eval.prepare_inputs()`.
- Returns: `scores`, a list of floats, the evaluation scores for each input-output pair.

`utils/distributed_sft.py`

Import: `from utils import distributed_sft`
Usage: `distributed_sft(list_of_model_names, list_of_sft_data_paths, list_of_gpu_ids, list_of_output_model_paths, batch_size=1, gradient_accumulation_steps=16, learning_rate=1e-5, epoch=3)`
- `list_of_model_names`: a list of model names (strings) that are compatible with `transformers.AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained()`, that you are going to fine-tune.
- `list_of_sft_data_paths`: a list of paths to SFT data files (strings), each corresponding to a model in `list_of_model_names`. The data files should be JSONL with each line {"prompt":..., "completion":...}.
- `list_of_gpu_ids`: a list of GPU ids (integers) to use for SFT. The length of this list could be anything: smaller, equal, larger than len(model_names). Larger is a waste. Smaller means models are assigned to GPUs in a round-robin fashion. Equal is perhaps best for parallelism. Users provide `gpu_ids` in config files, you should pass in it or a subset of it.
- `list_of_output_model_paths`: a list of paths (strings) to save the fine-tuned models, each corresponding to a model in `list_of_model_names`. Please save them in `logs/<your_method_name>/` folder to avoid conflict.
- `batch_size`, `gradient_accumulation_steps`, `learning_rate`, `epoch`: standard SFT hyperparameters, you can set them as you like. `batch_size * gradient_accumulation_steps` is the effective batch size.

`utils/numeric_swarm.py`

Use case: Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) for optimizing a set of numeric parameters. For example in model merging `x = \sum_{i=1}^n w_i * x_i`, you may want to optimize the weights `w_i` using PSO.

Import: `from utils.numeric_swarm import NumericSwarm`
Creating a PSO optimizer: `swarm = NumericSwarm(dimension, population, starting_velocity_mode="random", weight_randomness=True, inertia=0.2, cognitive_coeff=0.3, social_coeff=0.4, repel_coeff=0.05, step_length=0.5, repel_term=True, step_length_factor=0.95, minimum_step_length=0.1, patience=5, restart_patience=3)`
- `dimension`: integer, the number of parameters to optimize, `n` in the use case.
- `population`: integer, the number of particles in the swarm. Essentially how many candidate solutions to maintain in each iteration. 5-10 recommended, larger is more thorough but much slower.
- for all other hyperparameters, a default value is provided. Learn more (if you want to) at [link](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.11163).

Getting the current positions of all particles: `positions = swarm.get_particles()`
- `positions` will be a list of lists of floats, size `population` * `dimension`. Each inner list is the current position (i.e., the current candidate solution) of a particle.

Updating the swarm with new scores for each particle: `terminate_signal = swarm.update(scores)`
- `scores`: a list of floats, the scores (the higher the better) for each particle in the swarm. Length should be equal to `population`.
- `terminate_signal`: boolean, whether the optimization should terminate because of patience, for early stopping.

Getting the global best position found so far: `best_position = swarm.get_global_best_particle()`
- `best_position`: a list of floats, size `dimension`, the best candidate solution found so far.

There is no explicit max iterations: you just call `swarm.update()` for that many of times and stop when you want and use `swarm.get_global_best_particle()` to get the best solution found in the end.

`utils/logit_arithmetic.py`

Use case: you are fusing/contrasting the next-token logits from multiple models, e.g., `logits = w_1 * logits_1 + w_2 * logits_2 - w_3 * logits_3`, and genearte text from that joint distribution. Other logit operations (e.g. taking a confidence threshold over logit to decide something) is not supported here, implement in your own script.

Import: `from utils import logit_arithmetic`
Creating a logit arithmetic object: `logit_operator = logit_arithmetic.LogitArithmetic(model_names, model_devices, tokenizer)`
- `model_names`: a list of model names (strings) that are compatible with `transformers.AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained()`, that you are going to use for logit arithmetic.
- `model_devices`: a list of device strings (e.g., `['cuda:0', 'cuda:1', ...]`) to load each model onto. Length should be equal to `model_names`.
- `tokenizer`: a tokenizer object compatible with the models, e.g., `transformers.AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_name)`.

Generating responses with logit arithmetic: `outputs = logit_operator.batch_generate(prompts, tokenizer, batch_size=1, max_new_tokens=100, do_sample=True, temperature=1.0, arithmetic_func=average_logits)`
- `prompts`: a list of strings, the input prompts to generate from.
- `tokenizer`: the tokenizer object used to encode the prompts and decode the outputs.
- `batch_size`, `max_new_tokens`, `do_sample`, `temperature`: standard generation parameters.
- `arithmetic_func`: a function that takes in a list of logits tensors (one per model) and returns a single logits tensor after performing the desired arithmetic operation. An example function `average_logits` is provided in `logit_arithmetic.py` that simply averages the logits from all models, and is the default. See how a custom logit arithmetic function can be defined in `method/logit_logit_contrastive.py` for reference.